---
layout: post
title:  "Strange Times Are Here"
date: 2020-06-28
tags: [career, tech]
---
It's been weird times lately for me, and for many others. If it hasn't been
weird times for you, that must be some nice bubble you're living in.

I write this on a Sunday. Friday was my last day as an employee of The Des
Moines Forge Of Pillar Part Of Industry X.0 By Accenture. Fortunately I'm a
techbro and had a job offer the same day at a slightly higher salary. I don't
think I'm going to take it.

I happened to rewatch [_Atari: Game Over_](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt3715406)
yesterday. In it, Howard Warshaw, developer of not only the ill-fated _E.T._
game but also such unquestionable classics as _Yar's Revenge_, reflected on how
his brief experience at Atari kind of ruined him for subsequent job prospects.
Made him expect better, want more, be less willing to compromise for the sake of
going along with the typical corporate environment. Not just because of the wild
party culture of Atari in the early 1980s but just as much because of the
heights of creative achievement that he and his co-workers reached together,
enabled by that openness in which they could bring their whole selves to work.

When I came on at Pillar, it was in the process of being acquired by Accenture.
Accenture is the biggest corporation you never heard of. It employs literally
half a million people globally in all sorts of consulting and professional
services sectors. I knew of this, it was brought up in my interviews. I seem to
have a knack for coming into companies at these moments; my hiring at Banno, my
previous job, came at much the same juncture of their acquisition by Jack Henry
& Associates. And just like with Banno, the message that went out in Pillar was
that what the acquirer saw in the acquiree, the thing to which they attributed
the smaller company's success that made it such an attractive acquisition
target, was its great culture, and that the big company's intentions were to
learn from that and spread the lessons out to the larger company and with that
we were going to rock the world and it was going to be great.

I've had a fraught relationship with employment all my legally-employable life.
The workplace was always just an even more repressive corner of an already
repressive world where I never quite belonged and suffered because of it, yet if
I didn't find a way to slot myself into it, I would never be able to support
myself or a family. Pillar brought me out of the shell I'd built around myself
since I was a child, showed me my viewpoint was valid and valued in a way I
didn't realize was possible. It took time for me to adjust and really begin to
open up, and I still feel like that process was interrupted in the middle, but I
am so overwhelmingly grateful to the people I worked alongside at the Forge that
helped that happen. It was a culture that delighted in being eccentric and that
spirit made us powerful and because of it we did awesome work. Pillar showed me
that I could be seen as more than just a human resource or a code monkey, that I
could be valued as a fully three-dimensional human being with all my flaws and
foibles and ambitions and silly jokes and wild ideas and nerdy interests.

A week ago Friday though, Accenture told me something very different. Even after
all the apparently sincere and ground-breaking diversity and inclusion rhetoric
I'd heard, and what I took to be so many refreshingly bullshit-free statements
from CEO Julie Sweet, ultimately the message Accenture gave me was that I was
expendable: that literally some opaque process running in some cloud, triggered
by a fluctuation in a stock price or some such thing, could go and query an
employee database according to some algorithm, based off data like how many of
my work hours were directly billable to an already-won client, and by those
results could decide my professional fate, and that that was just totally normal
and the way things are done. Because that is evidently the world we are in now.

And this may be what sucks the most now, is that, after Pillar, I don't think I
can bring myself to settle for anything less... but what more, really, is out
there?

Last Fall, I had the great honor, made possible by Accenture even, to be paid a
normal work day's salary to be a guest lecturer for Hour Of Code, which is to
say that I along with several of my Forge co-workers spent a day helping to
guide public-school classrooms full of middle-school kids through some fun
coding exercises, where they could learn a little about what I do for a living.
One of the biggest things I was struck by and took away from that day was how
much more diverse those classrooms were from the rooms I typically spent a
workday in. To be slightly flippant about it, there were actually Black kids
there. And Hispanic kids. There was a Muslim girl (I'm assuming a little bit
here -- she was brown-skinned and had a hijab on) who was joyously competing
with her Black friend next to her for who could complete the exercises quicker.
I remember thinking that if I'm in a position to influence hiring decisions in
ten years or so I sure hope these kids apply. And there were also kids that were
totally not into it, who thought all this techie stuff was bullshit, like the
Black girl who aspired to be a journalist, and I saw her point of view as no
less valid, because kids like her are used to seeing white dudes with glasses
like me doing this stuff, not people like them, and also because journalism is
totally important and we need it, and yet, we're talking about language here,
which is all code really is, and even if you don't make software your career,
understanding how it works is only going to be more crucial to your success in
this society going forward. I didn't quite have the guts to say what I really
wanted to say, because I wasn't the real teacher and it wasn't my class. But
that was the beginnings of some notions in my head that I have higher purposes
to serve than just building another accounts-payable system.

I don't know what my future holds but I don't think I'm likely to just take
another plain old tech job. The kind of thing I really want to do involves
sharing the joy of creativity that comes with my profession and helping young
people find their way into it that might otherwise give it up before they get
the chance; because I nearly did too, and that's a whole other story. Pillar was
the first place I worked that tried to truly treat that kind of ambition as part
of the job, and whatever your company is, if you can't get down with that, I
don't think I can fuck with you anymore.

Fortunately, I have maybe a couple months worth of financial cushion in which to
try to sort this all out. That's not a privilege I ever had before.

Like I said at the top of this rant, these are weird times. Hunter S. Thompson
is famously credited with saying, "When the going gets weird, the weird turn
pro." I've been weird my whole life and this is my time to shine.
